The Bible is a book of facts.
It’s about real people, real events,
real history in real places.
In the Hebrew Scriptures,
there are at least 53 people
confirmed archaeologically.
One example is Pharaoh Shishak of Egypt.
The Bible mentions his invasion of Judah,
specifically dating it
“in the fifth year
of [Judean] King Rehoboam.”
For a long time,
the only record of that invasion
was the one found in the Bible.
Then a relief on the wall of a temple
at Karnak, Egypt,
was discovered, depicting
Shishak with captives.
It also records names
of conquered Israelite towns,
many of which have been identified
with Biblical sites.
It also mentions the “Field of Abram,”
the earliest reference in Egyptian records
to the Biblical patriarch Abraham.
This strengthens our confidence and faith
in the Bible as God’s Word.
The Bible was written
on perishable materials,
such as papyrus and parchment.
While no originals are known to exist today,
the number of ancient copies available now
is staggering:
some 11,000 Hebrew and Greek manuscripts,
more than for any other
ancient piece of literature.
By comparing the earliest,
most authoritative manuscripts,
scholars can identify inaccuracies
and mistakes that have crept in.
But the vast majority of differences
do not change the meaning at all.
One example is found at Luke 4:17,
which says that Jesus
“opened the scroll” of Isaiah.
But some manuscripts say
that he “unrolled the scroll.”
But isn’t the meaning the same?
God’s message has even survived
changes in language.
Writers of the Christian Greek Scriptures
quoted the Hebrew Scriptures,
but often
from the Greek Septuagint  translation.
At times, they paraphrased such quotations,
using slightly different wording.
But the message remained the same.
And most of Jesus’ words,
likely spoken in first-century Hebrew,
were recorded in Greek.
Still, his message is clear.
Today, at least parts of God’s Word
can be read in more than 3,000 languages.
The Bible’s survival reveals
a puzzling paradox:
Throughout history,
people were willing to die
to preserve the Bible
and make it available to everyone.
Others were willing to kill
to prevent access to it
and wipe it out of existence.
Why?
It’s the book’s content.
God’s Word “is alive and exerts power.”
It changes people’s lives
in ways that some welcome
but others resist—violently at times.
For example, responding
to Roman Emperor Diocletian’s edict
in 303 C.E.
“to destroy the sacred Scriptures by fire,”
Felix, a bishop of Thibiuca, reportedly said,
“It is better for me to be burned
than the sacred Scriptures.”
He paid with his life.
Efforts to destroy God’s message for mankind
continue today,
“but the word of our God endures forever.”